Title: IPython mini-book: Learning IPython for Interactive Computing and Data Visualization

I'm glad to present my new book, [Learning IPython for Interactive Computing and Data Visualization](http://ipython.rossant.net/), Packt
Publishing.

<!--[![Learning IPython for Interactive Computing and Data
Visualization]({filename}images/minibook.jpg)](http://ipython.rossant.net/)-->

This book is a **beginner-level introduction to IPython** for
interactive Python programming, high-performance numerical computing,
and data visualization. It assumes nothing more than familiarity with
Python. It targets developers, students, teachers, hobbyists who know
Python a bit, and who want to learn IPython for the extended console,
the Notebook, and for more advanced scientific applications.

 

The book first introduces IPython for interactive Python and shell
programming. It shows how IPython can considerably improve the
productivity of a developer who creates, debugs, benchmarks and profiles
Python code.

Then, the reader learns the very basics of vector computing, and
discovers how to load and analyze numerical and tabular data with NumPy
and Pandas. The book shows the interactive visualization capabilities of
the platform with Matplotlib, SciPy and PIL. It also contains a few
image processing examples.

Some techniques to accelerate Python code are also demonstrated, using
either interactive parallel computing features from IPython (using MPI
or not), or Cython to compile a portion of the code in C for really
interesting speedups.

Finally, the book shows how IPython can be customized for advanced uses,
notably with the creation of new extensions and magic commands.

The code is stored in a [GitHub
repository](https://github.com/rossant/ipython-minibook). It contains
IPython notebooks with most examples from the book.
